Editorial review: Document scroll-triggered animations (#43158)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/reference/properties/timeline-trigger/index.md

- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}}
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}}
- {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}}

## Syntax

```css
/* Keyword */
timeline-trigger: none;

/* name | source */
timeline-trigger: --t view();
timeline-trigger: --t --my-timeline;

/* name | source | activation range */
timeline-trigger: --t view() contain;
timeline-trigger: --t view() entry exit 50%;

/* name | source | activation range | active range */
timeline-trigger: --t view() contain / cover;
timeline-trigger: --t view() entry / entry exit 50%;

/* Multiple triggers */
timeline-trigger:
  --t view(),
  --other-trigger --my-timeline entry / entry 50% exit 50%;

/* Global values */
timeline-trigger: inherit;
timeline-trigger: initial;
timeline-trigger: revert;
timeline-trigger: revert-layer;
timeline-trigger: unset;
```

The `timeline-trigger` shorthand property is specified as the keyword `none` or one or more timeline triggers, separated by commas. Each timeline trigger is specified as a {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} value, a {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}} and optionally, a {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} value, separated by spaces.

> If specified, the {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} value can optionally be followed by a {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}} value, with the two separated by a forward slash.

Reviewer: Put part of this as an intro to the values, the rest in the description. See [animation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/animation) 

A few pages have strict rules of syntax above the values. See [flex](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/flex) as an example. But generally the details of order are within the text, (which is why i updated [font](https://pr44387.review.mdn.allizom.net/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Properties/font)

Author: OK, cool. I've updated the structure of the syntax section to follow these recent examples, here, and on all other ref pages in the PR.

### Values

> 

Reviewer: maybe  (from animation)
```suggestion

The keyword `none`, or one or more single `<timeline-trigger>` declarations, separated by commas, with each `<timeline-trigger>` including:

```

Author: I went with the form you've used on the new `font` page: 

> A shorthand specifying the various timeline trigger-related properties, or the keyword `none`.

- `none`

>   - : Specifies that the element does not create a scroll-triggered animation trigger. Equivalent to `none none normal`.

Reviewer: The spec says "Equivalent to `none none normal`." but i think it's more helpful to say it sets all four properties to their default values. Because `auto` is equivalent to `none` for `-source`, but that is not explained anywhere on this page (not that it needs to be), so saying the value is `none` and not `auto` is confusing here.

```suggestion
  - : Specifies that the element does not create a trigger, resetting all four longhand properties to their default values.
```
my preference is to add the "`none` is the equivalent of setting `none auto normal / normal`" in the section on source order. 

The spec reads 

>The [timeline-trigger-source](https://drafts.csswg.org/animation-triggers-1/#propdef-timeline-trigger-source) property specifies the [timeline trigger’s](https://drafts.csswg.org/animation-triggers-1/#timeline-trigger) associated [timeline](https://drafts.csswg.org/web-animations-1/#timeline). Values have the same meaning as those of [animation-timeline](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-animations-2/#propdef-animation-timeline), except that **none** instead causes the corresponding entry in the [coordinated value list](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-values-4/#coordinated-value-list) to not define a timeline trigger.

which equals `auto`, because `none` for animation timeline means there is no timeline and therefore no animation.

> The animation is not associated with a [timeline](https://drafts.csswg.org/web-animations-1/#timeline).

Author: Makes sense. I've updated the syntax description as suggested and moved the `none auto normal / normal` bit to the description.

- `<'timeline-trigger-name'>`
  - : A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-name")}} value representing the trigger's identifying name. Defaults to `none`.
- `<'timeline-trigger-source'>`
  - : A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}} value representing the trigger's timeline. Defaults to `auto`.

> - `<'timeline-trigger-activation-range'>`

Reviewer: add optional inline macro to the two optional ones.

Author: done

>   - : A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-activation-range")}} value representing the trigger's activation range. Defaults to [`cover`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Values/timeline-range-name#cover).

Reviewer: doesn't this default to `scroll` for `scroll()` and `cover` for `view()`?

Author: Ah, yes, updated as per previous discussions.

- `<'timeline-trigger-active-range'>`
  - : A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-active-range")}} value representing the trigger's activation range. Defaults to the same value as the `timeline-trigger-activation-range`.

> [!NOTE]

> > Due to the potential for ambiguities in the syntax, this shorthand's values must be given in the specified order.

Reviewer: move to the `### Shorthand property order` section, where it can be an intro instead of a note

Author: I have done that, copying the structure you used in the `font` page.

> ## Description

Reviewer: In this description section, add a sub-section on `none`, a sub-section on prop order, and either a sub-section explaining active v. activation or a sub-sub-section for that under the property order subsection. (basically, move some of the stuff from above into the description)

Author: I've basically done this. I think there's enough information about activation and active in other sections to not need a dedicated section.

> The `timeline-trigger` property can be used to set all the properties used to create a [CSS scroll-triggered animation](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Animation_triggers/Using_scroll-triggered_animations) trigger in a single declaration.

Reviewer: it defines all the properties, resetting those not explicitly set.

Author: updated

- A {{cssxref("timeline-trigger-source")}} value of [`view()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Guides/Scroll-driven_animations/Timelines#anonymous_view_progress_timeline_the_view_function), which selects the element's nearest ancestor scrolling element to define its timeline trigger.
- An activation range of [`entry`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Values/timeline-range-name#entry), meaning that the trigger will activate when its tracked element starts to enter the scrollport.
- An active range of `entry exit 50%` meaning that once activated, the trigger will stay active until its tracked element leaves the range between the start of the `entry` range and `50%` of the way through the [`exit`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference/Values/timeline-range-name#exit) range (when `50%` of the tracked element has left the scrollport via the scrollport's start edge).

An animated element can be triggered by the previously-described trigger by referencing its identifying name in its {{cssxref("animation-trigger")}} property.

For example:

```css
.animated {
  animation: rotate 3s infinite linear both;
  animation-trigger: --my-trigger play-forwards play-backwards;
}
```

> In this case, the animation will be controlled by a trigger with a `timeline-trigger-name` of `--my-trigger`. Its {{cssxref("animation-action")}} keywords — `play-forwards play-backwards` — specify that the animation should play forwards when the trigger activates (when the tracked element is scrolled into the activation range), and backwards on deactivation (when the tracked element is scrolled out of the active range).

Reviewer: This is getting into the weeds of a different property. If including, limit it to the name prop being the same as the  `animation-trigger-name` (and even that isn't necessary in the shorthand page, but is necessary on the timeline-trigger-name page). Prefer to refer to properties or to the guide.

Author: I've cut most of this, as it was getting too much into the weeds; I totally agree.

> [!NOTE]

> > It is possible for the animated element and the element that creates the trigger to be the same element.

Reviewer: fold this into the `animation-trigger-name` part, if keeping, with something like: "if the first component of the `timeline-trigger` property is the same `<dashed-ident>` as the element's {{cssxref("animation-trigger-name")}} value, the element is its own trigger."

Author: That bit doesn't exist anymore, but I have expanded this bit slightly, de-noted it, and merged it into the previous paragraph.
